Am Monday 09 August 2004 02.08 schrieb David Gordon Wilson:

> Thanks for your good response, Theo!

...

Thanks Dave, and also Richard for the later response. For the record, here is 
my entire Milliken correspondence chronologically:

On Friday 06 August 2004 08.44 wrote John Snyder:

> Dave and Theo,
>
> Would one or both you care to contact Doug Milliken bd427@bfn.org about
> what HuPI is and why? ..
.
> Doug Milliken wrote:
>  > ** I have a separate question for you -- What is the point of HuPI
>  > when there is already a perfectly good IHPVA and HPVA?  


Hi Doug,
A good question. When the old IHPVA was split up into the new IHPVA and the 
HPVA it was intended that the new IHPVA look after not only international 
records and publications in a professional manner, but also be a resource for 
general HPV advocacy. For various reasons this hasn't happened and it has now 
been decided that the IHPVA concern itself mainly with international records, 
rules, and events and not go into publishing. This has put a lot of burden 
back to the HPVA, but in my opinion the HPVA simply hasn't been able to cope 
with this and the rapidly changing times. For example, the quality of 
communication with the last two editors of Human Power has been patchy. At 
the same time, the *quantity* of communications within the *IHPVA* has been 
very small. In both cases we see that managing organisations purely by email 
is very difficult especially with people who have never seen each other and 
are separated by vast distances.

HuPI was an idea of Richard Ballantine, the present IHPVA chairman. He 
envisioned HuPI as a commercial complement to the IHPVA to undertake 
publishing and advocacy. The people actually interested turned out to be past 
HPVA board members and officers who were unsatisfied with the slow pace and 
some of the decisions within the HPVA, and hoped that the new group could 
operate more effectively. This indeed proved the case, and we were able to 
get Dave's HP archive project well underway and set up HPeJ quickly. However, 
Richard's original ideas were strongly modified when it showed that several 
HuPI members were more interested in a lower-key public-domain type project 
than a commercial enterprise. The present difference between the HuPI and the 
HPVA publications is that HuPI has an electronic presence available to any 
english-speaking netizen worldwide, while the traditional print publications, 
while still very valuable, can reach only paying members.



>  > And, is HuPI
>  > using copyrighted material from IHPVA without permission?  


The HP archive, while done by HuPI members, isn't "used" by HuPI. Also, we 
have permission from the IHPVA and from Paul Gracey. The project was also 
discussed and blessed orally by many others. However the main point is that 
almost all issues of Human Power specifically allow attributed reproduction. 
Permission isn't even required.



>  > Certainly
>  > I was never contacted about reuse/web-publishing of my original paper
>  > in the 2nd Scientific Symposium volume.  


The archive in question is about Human Power, not the Scientific Symposia (but 
see below about this).



>  > Since I don't believe that
>  > any special arrangements were made, there is a good chance that I
>  > hold USA Copyright which is heavily in favor of original authors.


All over the world, original authors always have an inalienable copyright 
since the Bern Convention in 1986, which the USA also signed in 1989. However 
by writing for a journal like Human Power, the author implicitly agrees to 
further use of the material by the publisher, or in the case of the explicit 
copyright statement of Human Power, the public. In the case of HP, the 
condition which must be adhered to is attribution, i.e. both the publisher 
(IHPVA) and the author must be mentioned.



>  > Haven't got time now to read over the HuPI website, but I will take
>  > a look later.  Would appreciate your comments on this question of
>  > copyright.


Besides the actual legal technicalities, it is a question of philosophy and 
culture. (I)HPVA are non-profit organisations specifically devoted to the 
disemination of HP information. Petty arguing about profits or slavish use of 
intellectual property rights is contrary to this. On a larger scale, it is a 
cultural clash between the public good and individual profits: pure politics. 
Are you on the side of information society and its achievements like the 
internet and free software, free speech and free information, or are you on 
the side of the rights industry, who bleeds the public and authors alike, 
makes vast profits from this? Of course both models have their place in 
society, but at the moment we are witnessing a huge if unseen battle between 
these sides which is may be as important as the impending US elections. If 
Microsoft, Disney, Murdock, Bush and Co., etc. have their way, this is indeed 
the end of free society. Just read Orwell's "Animal Farm" and "1984" to see 
what happens when people lose the ability to think.



> The material in question above is a scan of part of the 2nd Science
> Syposium put up on the web to be used only by Angus and the HPeJ
> editors. I intend to delete the reference folder's contents once
> Cameron's article is completed. 


In this case this nothing is published as nothing is linked. This is the 
equivalent of a private intranet. However it would of course be great if you 
would let us use your article(s) publicly as well, Doug. Then we can stop 
arguing about copyrights and devote this energy to getting the information 
published. Most authors are happy to have their work distributed as widely as 
possible, provided they are not "misused" by a commercial enterprise making 
lots of money from the material and giving little in return. In the case of 
HuPI this is not the case. Some go further and say: "What do I care if 
somebody *does* profit (financially) from my work, as long as I get 
credited?" This is the basis of free software. The "profit" here is not 
money, but peer status, an equally valuable commodity. Once you have this set 
of mind, you are actually glad if others profit from your work. Such "noble" 
sentiments are of course mainly a luxury available to those with full bellies 
and I am in no way condemning those who live in fear of losing what little 
they may have. Who I am condemning is those with over-full bellies who refuse 
to share.

Hope this answers your query, Doug!

Cheers, Theo

Theo Schmidt, editor HPeJ

----------------------------------
On Friday 06 August 2004 20.24 schrieb Doug Milliken:

> Hi Theo and all,
>
> Thanks for the note, much appreciated.  I'm writing this without a full
> understanding of the situation and on tight time (busy running our small
> family engineering company).  My intent is constructive, so please bear
> with me if my tone comes across otherwise.


Thank you, Doug. Your "tone" is fine! I hope mine is as well.



> First, as you could see from my paragraph to Angus Cameron, I was very
> surprised to see my old paper up on the open web.  It is easily found...If  
> you are going to use the website as an "intranet" it needs password  
>protection...(or maybe create a password protected ftp area).

The address was given to you privately. It was not linked publicly, so the 
chance of anybody unauthorised accessing this page was pretty minimal.

> You paint a picture that is very black and white between the "rights
> industry" and "free information".  My position (also strongly held) is in
> the middle between these two extremes and I hope you will consider it.


The "extremes" and also intermediate positions are all required in society, 
but they must balance. Anything which upsets the balance, the system gets out 
of control, which is what we're witnessing, e.g. (starting early):

1) Catholic church keeps the Bible from masses by refusing to translate it in 
order to keep power and collect money from ignorant people.

2) Luther translates Bible and creates new group (Protestant Church).

3) Peasants rebel, an unfortunate war.

4) Gutenberg invents printing. Literature available to all, at a price.

5) Ben Franklin, etc.

6) Edison invents the phonograph. Recording studios are set up and cylinders 
(later discs) sold.

7) Stars (like Caruso) profit and become well known.

Then come radio, tv, xerography, CDs, tapes, etc. Bill Gates "invents" 
proprietary software, Richard Stallman "reinvents" free software. Each new 
development upsets the system a bit, but it remains more or less in balance 
for several years, as producing media (books, records, film) is so expensive, 
that indivdual private or public production and reproduction is almost not 
feasible, so that the consumer pays mainly for the media, not the content. 
(Today the physical media are far cheaper, yet the media industry is trying 
to get the same prices as before, i.e. they are charging more for content, 
which they however get very cheaply from the creators. Indeed they are not 
really selling media or contents, but simply rights to the content. The media 
industry has become the rights industry, and some companies are making money 
simply by buying and selling rights, but are not actually doing anything 
productive.)

Then came the internet, new formats like MPG and MP3 and new hardware with 
extraordinary capabilities at a cheap price. Both "extremes" overreact. The 
industry continues to price CDs way in the sky and invest in digital 
restriction management, the consumers react by copying and distributing 
everything copyable, the same with software and video. (The DVD consortium 
continues to extort licence fees from every user of its CSS format which 
nobody really wants and jail "offenders": Orwell fulfilled!) The US 
government in particular sides heavily with the industry but allows things 
like spam to get out of hand on the basis of "free speech". China is even 
worse, allowing spam but not free speech. Other goverments follow. 
Governments also overreact by allowing trivial software patents. The USA has 
already done so, the EU is debating.

Except for paper books, the system is out of control. Fair prices for content 
are almost unheard of. Out of the free software movement comes a partial 
solution for many: free content. Many new licences are born, allowing the 
licencing of free content while retaining the authors' rights. "Small" 
authors and artists profit, universities begin to offer knowledge freely on 
the internet, e.g. MIT with its open courses. 

This is where we stand today. Politicians have it in their power to push 
mankind either towards a more open society or towards more technocratic 
dictatorships. The middle ground is thin.



> When I contributed to HP and the Scientific Symposium, my understanding was
> that IHPVA would make a modest amount of money from distribution, both of
> the original publications and from back issues.  In effect I was giving
> IHPVA the rights to make some money from my labor, which in turn would help
> the club survive.  


Part of the conflict is asking which is now the "real" IHPVA, due to the 
unfortunate name confusion, for which both Carole and I are partially 
responsible.

Part of the misunderstanding is the thought that it could be possible to make 
money from back issues. Not so: The cost of stocking, postage and handling 
far outweighs the meagre returns. Back issues are a service, not a business. 



> Since the current HPVA is far from a rich organization,


Maybe not rich, but amply endowed. There is still the $25'000 or so which 
nobody seems to want to use for anything except litigation. We at Futurebike 
have far less.



> I believe that this scheme should still remain in place--back
> issues/reprints/downloads/etc should be made available with some nominal
> fees flowing to HPVA.  Of course downloads could be offered at a lower
> price than the current sales of paper reprints.  Numerous web banking
> schemes (like PayPal) exist to support small electronic payments.


This is a valid argument. It *could* happen this way if great care is taken to 
set up an optimal system. However I don't believe in it. Setting up the 
system costs far more than what can be earned. We spent thousands at 
Futurebike setting up a web shop, which is practically not used. Micropayment 
systems are still more trouble than they are worth. I have a PayPal account 
which is useful for trading with others having such an account, but 
transferring funds in or out of the account is a pain.

The upshot is: save all the bother and reach more people at the same time by 
freeing back issues, etc. That way they distribute themselves at little cost 
to the organisation, which thereby saves money while acting in accordance with 
the purpose stated in its byelaws. A win-win situation, not the 
lose-situation which some HPVA board members seem to regard.



> For an example of this on a larger scale, our book publisher, <www.sae.org>
> dissemenates a huge amount of technical information (papers, etc) for a
> nominal price (the actual prices might be too high--but that is debatable,
> they have a paid staff to support).


Well of course SAE is much larger. And if they really need the income from 
their web shop, so be it. But I think they are also caught in the old way of 
thinking. Why should I pay 59$ for a specification of non-metallic brake 
tubing? (Just looked it up.) 5$ would be more sensible. Or if the SAE was 
really concerned with automotive safety, the specification would be free so 
that this specification is circulated as widely as possible. As a small 
engineer I would be tempted to not read the specification and use <whatever> 
for my brake tubing or to search for an alternative specification or copy it 
somewhere.



> The income from sale of SAE papers is used to cover the costs of
> distribution and to support other educational goals of SAE.  For an example
> of the latter, SAE has been paying my travel expenses so I can speak to
> college groups around the USA (and once in Mexico) about our speciality of
> vehicle dynamics.  


While I admire your generosity of giving your time, viewed from the other side 
(being a bit nasty here, sorry!): Joe Blog: "Why should I pay $59 for a brake 
tubing specification just so that so-and-so can have a good time travelling 
around lecturing? Why doesn't he just put his speciality online?"



> Like HPVA, SAE is non-profit and all revenues are put
> back into the organization--no one "profits" when SAE sells copies of
> technical papers.


True. My wife runs a very efficient non-profit with a large turnover and some 
millions reserve. All up-and-up and highly ethical, but I sometimes have an 
uneasy feeling when lots of people donate about 10$ each, and one donation 
may just cover the desert of a meal at a board meeting.



> Another reason to maintain "information for nominal fee" is very simple.
> I've kept my IHPVA/HPVA membership through thick and thin, and paid for the
> HP issues that I've collected.  Frankly, I felt cheated when an email
> correspondent gleefully told me that he was able to download the whole lot
> for free.  This was about a month ago, when (I assume) that the HP archive
> was up on the HuPI site for a brief period?


This is a (understandable) misconception. You are not cheated if the archive 
is available freely. You had the information first, you have it on paper, 
which is a lot handier than online, you don't have to download the rather 
large files, let alone print anything out, you can profit from the new 
improved index, you can profit from completing your collection with the 
issues which may be missing. No need to feel cheated.

"...the more you give, the more you get." Amartya Sen, Nobel-Prize for 
Economics 1998



> In an ideal world I would ask the principles of HuPI to re-integrate into
> IHPVA/HPVA 


Ideally I might agree, but organisations and people aren't ideal. It is 
natural that people break away from groups when they want to do something 
new. It is natural for innovators to break away and form new companies when 
their old companies don't follow their ideas. This always results in some 
transfer of know-how and some bad feelings, but is probably unavoidable. E.g. 
the WEST epoxy people were so ingrained with the California climate that they 
didn't formulate epoxies for the humid and cool English climate, and some 
people broke away from WEST and founded SPS in England in order to do this.



> and stop acting in a way that looks (to me) like you are taking
> from our club without giving back. 


On the contrary, we are giving, not taking. HPVA is taking, by claiming 
ownership over something it does not posess, and even if it did, wasting our 
time with these copyright discussions. And acting paranoid, by even thinking 
of sinking the 25'000$ assets in lawyers' fees, for what purpose?

Dave has *given* the HPVA (and everybody else) a new index, a searchable 
archive, and has even *given* the HPVA 300 CDs with the archive on it. Brian 
Wilson has *given* the HPVA (and everybody else) server infrastructure and 
connectivity worth many thousands, year after year. The rest of us have 
*given* lots of our time.



> In a more practical sense, if HuPI
> wants to remain independent, I hope that you can come to an agreement with
> IHPVA/HPVA so that nominal funds flow back to the club that made the
> initial effort to publish the material in the first place.


Well, like I said before, any funds flowing back are not worth the much 
greater effort needed to make this possible. It would be better for the HPVA 
to come round to the new way of thinking. There is still room for commercial 
activity by using free content as a basis. 



> Ps to Theo -- on one of my SAE lecture trips earlier this year, I stayed in
> San Luis Obispo with Carole and George Leone--and of course heard their
> side of this question.  May I have permission to cc this correspondence to
> Carole?


Sure, feel free. May I have your permission to copy to the rest of HuPI 
(Richard Ballantine, Brian Wilson, Elrey)? 

Best regards,
Theo

-----------------------------
Hi Theo,

Thanks for your thoughtful reply.  I'd like to end this now with just a
couple of other thoughts, and then I've got to get packed for my trip
tomorrow. 

Agreed--SAE paper prices are high, but remember that the market they
basically serve is the car manufacturers, not you and I working at home on
prototype vehicles.  Most SAE papers and standards are produced by
employees of the car companies (or suppliers) on company time.  In our
case, working at home, we can go to a library for the SAE information.  In
fact, libraries might be very good customers for HP archives, Symposium
volumes, etc. 

I'm not fully convinced that the web shop is impractical, too bad that
yours hasn't been successful.  For example, I recently met the young guy
who set up this small web shop in a day or so--
  http://www.PerformanceSimulations.Com/howtobuy.htm 
There are many ways to do this for very little trouble, the web seems
to be quite good for small business.


I am very sad to hear that HPVA is spending their money on legal fees, a
total waste.  Pretty sure that this money is what was left after the DuPont
Watercraft Speed Prizes. 

Some history you might not know:  When we got the $35000 prize grant from
DuPont (the check came to me as prize committee director), Bruce
Rosenstiel(sp?, IHPVA treasurer) invested it in some utility bonds (or
equivalent ultra-safe investment) and by a good stroke of luck the money
about doubled so we were left with about $35000 in the treasury.  This was
left after we paid out the $35000 in Yearly Prizes and the Grand Prize to 
Decavitator. 

Along with Marti and a few others, I did my best as long as I was involved
in IHPVA to keep that money somewhat "protected".  My personal hope was
that it might stay invested and grow into enough to do something really
big, like hire a real employee (to break out of total dependence on
volunteers), or even set up an IHPVA office.  Instead, it appears to have
slowly been spent over the years--for example, I remember opposing the
purchase of an expensive timing system, which could have been rented once a
year. 


Feel free to send my earlier reply (best in un-edited format?) and also
this version on to the other members of HuPI. 

Best wishes,

-- Doug Milliken

